Add document about caching in matomo. (#461)
piwik/developer-documentation: docs/4.x/caching-in-matomo.md

---
category: DevelopInDepth
---
# Caching in Matomo

Like all software, Matomo uses caching to improve its performance. This document explains every type of cache used
by Matomo, and how core developers and plugin developers can make use of them.

## Transient Cache

The **Transient** cache is the simplest cache available in Matomo. It is an in-memory cache that stores values in
a PHP array. Data is cached only for the current request.

Use this cache in a request if you need to avoid invoking the same, expensive logic multiple times in a single
request. Examples of that might be to cache the result of an API call to get a list of entities. You might need that
list in multiple places in PHP, but only really need to issue a database query once.

See the {@see Matomo\Cache\Backend\Transient::class} class for more information.

## Lazy Cache

The **Lazy** cache is a cache that requests and reads cached data on demand. When you cache data in the Lazy cache,
it will be available across requests, for example, in a file backend, but will not be read until it is requested.

> In the backend, the data will be stored in one entry per cache key (eg, one php file per cache key).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the backend, the data will be stored in one entry per cache key (e.g., one php file per cache key).
```

This cache is most useful for caching that needs available across requests, but doesn't need to be accessed very
often. An example might be the result of an HTTP request, or a method that issues an HTTP request, that is done
in a Controller action. Issuing the HTTP request every time the controller action is invoked could make the controller
action seem slow, so we want to cache the result. We don't need it in any other context, however, so we want the
cache to be accessed only when we want the data. The Lazy cache is perfect for this.

See the {@see Matomo\Cache\Backend\Lazy::class} class for more information.

## Eager Cache

The **Eager** cache is a cache like the Lazy cache in that it will make cached data available across requests, but
every piece of cached data in the Eager cache is loaded at the start of each request.

> In the backend, the eager cache data will all be stored in a single entry (so, eg, all cached data is in a single php

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the backend, the eager cache data will all be stored in a single entry (so, e.g., all cached data is in a single php
```

Option values and entity information (like site information) should all be stored in the tracker cache, so, ideally, we
never issue a database query to get it. (Eventually the cache data will become stale, and we may have to query it again,
but most requests will use cached data.)

See the {@see Piwik\Tracker\Cache} class for more information.

# Cache invalidation

When it is known that data in a cache is no longer valid, it must be invalidated. If, for example, a measurable setting is changed
for a site, and that setting is used during tracking, the `Tracker::deleteCacheWebsiteAttributes()` must be called.

Each individual cache type has a different way of doing that.

# Cache Backends

The cache types above all store data in the same place. This place is determined by the cache backend specified in INI configuration.
The `[Cache] backend` option determines where the data gets saved. The possible options are straightforward: cache to an **array**,
cache to a **file**, cache to **redis**.

There is also the **chained** cache which is worth a note. The chained cache allows using multiple backends. For example,

> caching to an array, file and redis. Here, when requesting data, we'd first check if it's in the array backend, and if there use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
caching to an array, file and redis. Here, when requesting data, we'd first check if it's in the array backend, and if it is there, we use it.
```
